# 4 step Dimensional Design Process

## Step 1: Identify business process requirements
- Select the business process for which the dimensional model will be designed. 
- Based on the selection, the requirements for the business process are gathered. 
- A business process require more than one dimensional model.

## Step 2: Identify the grain
- Identify the granularity of each fact table and business process. 
- During this process, you identify the fact table types and the preliminary candidates for dimensions and measures.

## Step 3: Identify the dimensions
- After you have determined the grain of your model, you identify the dimensions that are true to that grain. 
- You create columns, hierarchies, and cases for snowflaking.
- Who, What, Where, When, Why & How

## Step 4: Identify the measures/facts
- During this step of the dimensional model design cycle, you identify the measures and the type of measures that are included in the dimensional model.

# Case Study

## Business Process
- Taxi company would like to design a data model to capture all critical data elements.
  - 1. Track rides done by driver & their performance.
  - 2. How many rides are happening in a common/famous destination each day.
  - 3. How many trips cancelled per day.
  - 4. How many rides and the average price during peak hour per day.

## Grain
- Individual trip on each transaction level.

## Dimensions
- Date
- Customers
- Drivers
- Cars
- Documents
- Devices
- Locations

## Facts/Measures
- Trips
- Payments
