# What is Data?

- Data is a collection of raw, unorganized facts and details like text, observations, figures, symbols etc.
- In other words, ***data does not carry any specific purpose and has no significance by itself***.
- Data is measured in terms of bits and bytes – which are basic units of information in the context of computer storage and processing.
- Data can be recorded and ***doesn’t have any meaning unless processed***.


## What is Information?

- Information is processed, organized and structured data.
- It provides context of the data and enables decision making.
- Information is extracted from the data, by analyzing and interpreting pieces of data.


# Data vs Information

- Data is a collection of facts, while information puts those facts into context.
- While data is raw and unorganized, information is organized.
- Data points are individual and sometimes unrelated. Information maps out that data to provide a big-picture view of how it all fits together.
- Data, on its own, is meaningless. When it’s analyzed and interpreted, it becomes meaningful information.
- Data does not depend on information, however, information depends on data.
- Data isn’t sufficient for decision-making, but you can make decisions based on information.


# What is Database?

- Database is an electronic place/system where data is stored in a way that it can be easily accessed, managed and updated.
- To make real use of Data, we need Database management systems (DBMS).


# What is DBMS?

- DBMS is a collection of interrelated data and a set of programs to access those data. 
- The collection of data, usually referred to as the database, contains information relevant to an enterprise. 
- The primary goal of a DBMS is to provide a way to store and retrieve database information that is both convenient and efficient.
- A DBMS is the database itself, along with all the software and functionality. 
- It is used to perform different operations, like addition, access, updating and deletion of the data.
