# NoSQL Databases (Not Only SQL)
- It is a non-tabular database and store data differently than relational tables. 
- NoSQL databases come in a variety of types based on their data model. The main types are document, key-value, wide-column, and graph. 
- They provide flexible schemas and scale easily with large amounts of data and high user loads. They are schema free.
- Data structures used are not tabular, they are more flexible, has the ability to adjust dynamically.
- Can handle huge amount of data (big data).

# NoSQL Databases Advantages

## Flexible Schema
- RDBMS has pre-defined schema, which become an issue when we do not have all the data with us or we need to change the schema.
- NoSQL provides flexible schema

## Horizontal Scalinh (Scale Out)
 - In RDBMS multiple relational tables are present & its recommended to have all tables in single DB. Hence, horizontalscaling is difficult.
- With NoSQL databases, this ismade simpler since collections are self-contained and not coupled relationally. 
- This allows them to be distributed across nodes more simply, as queries do not have to “join” them together across nodes.
- Scaling horizontally is achieved through Sharding OR Replica-sets.

## High Availability
- NoSQL databases are highly available due to its auto replication feature i.e. whenever any kind of failure happens data replicates itself to the preceding consistent state.
- If a server fails, we can access that data from another server as well, as in NoSQL database data is stored at multiple servers.

## Easy insert and read operations.
- Queries in NoSQL databases can be faster than SQL databases. 
- Why? Data in SQL databases is typically normalised, so queries for a single object or entity require you to join data from multiple tables. 
- As your tables grow in size, the joins can become expensive. 
- However, data in NoSQL databases is typically stored in a way that is optimised for queries. 
- The rule of thumb when you use MongoDB is ***data that is accessed together should be stored together***. 
- Queries typically do not require joins, so the queries are very fast.

# When to use NoSQL?
- Fast-paced Agile development
- Storage of structured and semi-structured data
- Huge volumes of data
- Requirements for scale-out architecture
- Modern application paradigms like micro-services and real-time streaming.

