# CAP Theorem
CAP theorem is a concept in distributed systems that states that it is impossible for a distributed system to simultaneously provide all three of the following guarantees:

## 1. Consistency
- In a consistent system, all nodes see the same data simultaneously. 
- If we perform a read operation on a consistent system, it should return the value of the most recent write operation. 
- The read should cause all nodes to return the same data. All users see the same data at the same time, regardless of the node they connect to. 
- When data is written to a single node, it is then replicated across the other nodes in the system.

## 2. Availability
- When availability is present in a distributed system, it means that the system remains operational all of the time. 
- Every request will get a response regardless of the individual state of the nodes. 
- This means that the system will operate even if there are multiple nodes down. 
- Unlike a consistent system, ***there’s no guarantee that the response will be the most recent write operation***.

## 3. Partition Tolerance
- When a distributed system encounters a partition, it means that there’s a ***break in communication between nodes***. 
- If a system is partition-tolerant, ***the system does not fail, regardless of whether messages are dropped or delayed between nodes*** within the system. 
- To have partition tolerance, the system must replicate records across combinations of nodes and networks.

# What does the CAP Theorem says
- According to the CAP theorem, a distributed system can ***provide only two of the above properties simultaneously***. 
- The theorem formalises the ***tradeoff between consistency and availability when there’s a partition***.

# Types of Databases

## CA Databases
- Prioritize consistency and availability over partition tolerance. 
- In other words, they are designed to maintain a consistent view of data across all nodes in the system, even in the face of network failures. 
- However, this may result in temporary unavailability during network partitions.
- ***Practically impossible to implement***

## CP Databases
- Prioritize consistency and partition tolerance over availability. 
- In other words, they are designed to maintain a consistent view of data across all nodes in the system, even when network partitions occur. 
- However, this ***may result in reduced availability during network failures***.
- e.g If partition occurs the node will ***not respond to clent unit it receiives updated/most recent data***. System will not be available.

## AP Databases
- Prioritize availability and partition tolerance over consistency. 
- In other words, they are designed to maintain a highly available system, even in the face of network failures. 
- However, this ***may result in inconsistent data during network partitions***.
- e.g. If partition occurs ***nodes will work individually & will be highlty available***. Data will not be consistent accross nodes.
